backend/README.md, before:

# rtm-windows-mvp

Windows-only MVP for the Real-Time Monitoring part of our OT ransomware platform.

## Components
 - **Agent (Windows service)**: watches file churn, process starts, Sysmon + PowerShell logs and can automatically respond to threats using SOAR playbooks.
- **Secure transport**: MQTT/TLS (default) or HTTPS to collector.
- **Collector (optional)**: FastAPI endpoint that verifies HMAC and prints/stores events.

## Quick start (dev)

1) Run the agent on Windows:

```bat
cd agent
py -3.11 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
set RTM_HMAC_KEY=CHANGE_ME_TO_A_LONG_RANDOM
py -3.11 agent.py
```

2) (Optional) Run the collector:

```bat
cd collector
py -3.11 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
set RTM_HMAC_KEY=CHANGE_ME_TO_A_LONG_RANDOM
py -3.11 app.py
```

3) Generate noise to test:
```bat
for /l %i in (1,1,250) do @echo X>%USERPROFILE%\Desktop\test%i.txt
start powershell -NoLogo -Command "Write-Output 'hello'"
```

## Install as a service (prod-lite)

- Create an EXE:
```bat
cd agent
build_exe.bat
```

- Install with the PowerShell script:
```ps1
.\install_service.ps1 -ExePath "C:\rtm-windows-mvp\agent\dist\agent.exe" -HmacKey "YOUR_LONG_RANDOM"
```

## Switch transport
- MQTT (default): configure broker CA/user in `agent\config.yaml` and drop CA at `deploy\tls\ca.crt`.
- HTTPS: set `outbound.mode: https` and point to your collector URL (TLS).

## What it detects (out-of-box)
- Mass **file writes** per second (burst threshold).
- **Process starts** for script/LOLBINs (powershell, wscript, cscript, cmd, mshta).
- **Sysmon** file/registry/process events.
- **PowerShell ScriptBlock** logs (Event ID 4104).
- **Service installs / VSS delete** indicators in event text.

Tune thresholds in `agent\config.yaml`.

## Automated response and SOAR

The MVP now includes a simple **Security Orchestration, Automation and Response (SOAR)**
layer.  Playbooks live under the `playbooks/` directory next to
`agent.py` and are loaded at runtime.  A playbook consists of a set of
trigger conditions (for example, minimum severity or specific event types)
and a list of actions.  Supported actions include:

* `kill_process` – terminate a suspicious process by PID.
* `isolate_network` – disable all non‑loopback network interfaces on
  Windows via `netsh` to prevent lateral movement.  Requires
  administrative privileges and has no effect on other platforms.
* `quarantine_file` – move a file to a quarantine folder in the current
  user's home directory.
* `notify` – invoke a notification callback.  By default this prints to
  stdout but can be customised to publish a follow‑up event back to the
  collector.

The default playbooks are defined in `playbooks/default.yaml`.  You can
create additional YAML files in the `playbooks/` directory to customise
behaviour.  Each file should contain a top‑level `playbooks:` list.
Playbooks will be evaluated in the order they are loaded.  See
`response.py` for implementation details.

## Extending the platform

This repository contains placeholder directories for future modules:

* **`ai/`** – reserved for machine‑learning–based detection and predictive
  analytics.  Components placed here should implement hybrid detection,
  sandbox analysis and continuous learning.
* **`backup/`** – reserved for secure backup and immutable storage.
  Modules placed here should handle snapshotting, vaulting and
  high‑speed recovery.  A separate team will populate these
  components.

When building the agent executable with `build_exe.bat`, the
`config.yaml`, `playbooks/` directory and `response.py` are bundled
alongside the binary so that custom configurations and playbooks are
available at runtime.

Commit message:

feat(agent): restart on config changes

backend/README.md, after:

# rtm-windows-mvp

Windows-only MVP for the Real-Time Monitoring part of our OT ransomware platform.

## Components
 - **Agent (Windows service)**: watches file churn, process starts, Sysmon + PowerShell logs and can automatically respond to threats using SOAR playbooks.
- **Secure transport**: MQTT/TLS (default) or HTTPS to collector.
- **Collector (optional)**: FastAPI endpoint that verifies HMAC and prints/stores events.

## Quick start (dev)

1) Run the agent on Windows:

```bat
cd agent
py -3.11 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
set RTM_HMAC_KEY=CHANGE_ME_TO_A_LONG_RANDOM
py -3.11 agent.py
```

2) (Optional) Run the collector:

```bat
cd collector
py -3.11 -m pip install -r requirements.txt
set RTM_HMAC_KEY=CHANGE_ME_TO_A_LONG_RANDOM
py -3.11 app.py
```

3) Generate noise to test:
```bat
for /l %i in (1,1,250) do @echo X>%USERPROFILE%\Desktop\test%i.txt
start powershell -NoLogo -Command "Write-Output 'hello'"
```

## Install as a service (prod-lite)

- Create an EXE:
```bat
cd agent
build_exe.bat
```

- Install with the PowerShell script:
```ps1
.\install_service.ps1 -ExePath "C:\rtm-windows-mvp\agent\dist\agent.exe" -HmacKey "YOUR_LONG_RANDOM"
```

## Switch transport
- MQTT (default): configure broker CA/user in `agent\config.yaml` and drop CA at `deploy\tls\ca.crt`.
- HTTPS: set `outbound.mode: https` and point to your collector URL (TLS).

## What it detects (out-of-box)
- Mass **file writes** per second (burst threshold).
- **Process starts** for script/LOLBINs (powershell, wscript, cscript, cmd, mshta).
- **Sysmon** file/registry/process events.
- **PowerShell ScriptBlock** logs (Event ID 4104).
- **Service installs / VSS delete** indicators in event text.

Tune thresholds in `agent\config.yaml`.  The agent watches this file and
automatically restarts when changes are saved, so updates take effect
immediately.

## Automated response and SOAR

The MVP now includes a simple **Security Orchestration, Automation and Response (SOAR)**
layer.  Playbooks live under the `playbooks/` directory next to
`agent.py` and are loaded at runtime.  A playbook consists of a set of
trigger conditions (for example, minimum severity or specific event types)
and a list of actions.  Supported actions include:

* `kill_process` – terminate a suspicious process by PID.
* `isolate_network` – disable all non‑loopback network interfaces on
  Windows via `netsh` to prevent lateral movement.  Requires
  administrative privileges and has no effect on other platforms.
* `quarantine_file` – move a file to a quarantine folder in the current
  user's home directory.
* `notify` – invoke a notification callback.  By default this prints to
  stdout but can be customised to publish a follow‑up event back to the
  collector.

The default playbooks are defined in `playbooks/default.yaml`.  You can
create additional YAML files in the `playbooks/` directory to customise
behaviour.  Each file should contain a top‑level `playbooks:` list.
Playbooks will be evaluated in the order they are loaded.  See
`response.py` for implementation details.

## Extending the platform

This repository contains placeholder directories for future modules:

* **`ai/`** – reserved for machine‑learning–based detection and predictive
  analytics.  Components placed here should implement hybrid detection,
  sandbox analysis and continuous learning.
* **`backup/`** – reserved for secure backup and immutable storage.
  Modules placed here should handle snapshotting, vaulting and
  high‑speed recovery.  A separate team will populate these
  components.

When building the agent executable with `build_exe.bat`, the
`playbooks/` directory and `response.py` are bundled inside the binary.
`config.yaml` is copied next to the built executable so that it can be
edited without rebuilding.  The running agent monitors this file and
automatically restarts when changes are saved, enabling real‑time
configuration updates.
